PMID: 36419936 | 2022 | Frontiers in cellular neuroscience
  Title: p53-dependent c-Fos expression is a marker but not executor for motor neuron death in spinal muscular atrophy mouse models.
  Authors: Buettner JM, Sowoidnich L, Gerstner F ... Simon CM
  Abstract: The activation of the p53 pathway has been associated with neuronal degeneration in different neurological disorders, including spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) where aberrant expression of p53 drives selective death of motor neurons destined to degenerate. Since direct p53 inhibition is an unsound therapeutic approach due carcinogenic effects, we investigated the expression of the cell death-associated p53 downstream targets 
---
PMID: 29298131 | 2018 | Redox report : communications in free radical research
  Title: A systematic review of p53 regulation of oxidative stress in skeletal muscle.
  Authors: Beyfuss K, Hood DA
  Abstract: [BACKGROUND] p53 is a tumor suppressor protein involved in regulating a wide array of signaling pathways. The role of p53 in the cell is determined by the type of imposed oxidative stress, its intensity and duration. The last decade of research has unravelled a dual nature in the function of p53 in mediating the oxidative stress burden. However, this is dependent on the specific properties of the applied stress and thus requires further analysis. [METHODS] A systematic review was performed following an electronic search of Pubmed, Google Scholar, and ScienceDirect databases. Articles published in the English language between January 1, 1990 and March 1, 2017 were identified and isolated based on the analysis of p53 in skeletal muscle in both animal and cell culture models. [RESULTS] Literature was categorized according to the modality of imposed oxidative stress including exercise, diet modification, exogenous oxidizing agents, tissue manipulation, irradiation, and hypoxia. With low to moderate levels of oxidative stress, p53 is involved in activating pathways that increase time for cell repair, such as cell cycle arrest and autophagy, to enhance cell survival. However, with greater levels of stress intensity and duration, such as with irradiation, hypoxia, and oxidizing agents, the role of p53 switches to facilitate increased cellular stress levels by initiating DNA fragmentation to induce apoptosis, thereby preventing aberrant cell proliferation. [CONCLUSION] Current evidence confirms that p53 acts as a threshold regulator of cellular homeostasis. Therefore, within each modality, the intensity and duration are parameters of the oxidative stressor that must be analyzed to determine the role p53 plays in regulating signaling pathways to maintain cellular health and function in skeletal muscle. [ABBREVIATIONS] Acadl: acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, long chain; Acadm: acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, C-4 to C-12 straight chain; AIF: apoptosis-inducing factor; Akt: protein kinase B (PKB); AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; ATF-4: activating transcription factor 4; ATM: ATM serine/threonine kinase; Bax: BCL2 associated X, apoptosis regulator; Bcl-2: B cell Leukemia/Lymphoma 2 apoptosis regulator; Bhlhe40: basic helix-loop-helix family member e40; BH3: Borane; Bim: bcl-2 interacting mediator of cell death; Bok: Bcl-2 related ovarian killer; COX-IV: cytochrome c oxidase IV; cGMP: Cyclic guanosine monophosphate; c-myc: proto-oncogene protein; Cpt1b: carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1B; Dr5: death receptor 5; eNOS: endothelial nitric oxide synthase; ERK: extracellular regulated MAP kinase; Fas: Fas Cell surface death receptor; FDXR: Ferredoxin Reductase; FOXO3a: forkhead box O3; Gadd45a: growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible 45 alpha; GLS2: glutaminase 2; GLUT 1 and 4: glucose transporter 1(endothelial) and 4 (skeletal muscle); GSH: Glutathione; Hes1: hes family bHLH transcription factor 1; Hey1: hes related family bHLH transcription factor with YRPW motif 1; HIFI-α: hypoxia-inducible factor 1, α-subunit; HK2: Hexokinase 2; HSP70: Heat Shock Protein 70; H
---
PMID: 32679166 | 2020 | Biochimica et biophysica acta. Reviews on cancer
  Title: PERP-ing into diverse mechanisms of cancer pathogenesis: Regulation and role of the p53/p63 effector PERP.
  Authors: Roberts O, Paraoan L
  Abstract: The tetraspan plasma membrane protein PERP (p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP22) is a lesser-known transcriptional target of p53 and p63. A member of the PMP22/GAS3/EMP membrane protein family, PERP was originally identified as a p53 target specifically trans-activated during apoptosis, but not during cell-cycle arrest. Several studies have since shown downregulation of PERP expression in numerous cancers, suggesting that PERP is a tumour suppressor protein. This review focusses on the important advances made in elucidating the mechanisms regulating PERP expression and its function as a tumour suppressor in diverse human cancers, including breast cancer and squamous cell carcinoma. Investigating PERP's role in clinically-aggressive uveal melanoma has revealed that PERP engages a positive-feedback loop with p53 to regulate its own expression, and that p63 is required beside p53 to achieve pro-apoptotic levels of PERP in this cancer. Furthermore, the recent discovery of the apoptosis-mediating interaction of PERP with SERCA2b at the plasma membrane-endoplasmic reticulum interface demonstrates a novel mechanism of PERP stabilisation, and how PERP can mediate Ca
---
PMID: 25509187 | 2014 | Ukrainian biochemical journal
  Title: ERN1 knockdown modifies the hypoxic regulation of TP53, MDM2, USP7 and PERP gene expressions in U87 glioma cells.
  Authors: Danilovskyi SV, Minchenko DO, Moliavko OS ... Minchenko OH
  Abstract: Endoplasmic reticulum stress and hypoxia are necessary components of malignant tumors growth and suppression of ERN1 (from endoplasmic reticulum to nuclei-1) signalling pathway, which is linked to the apoptosis and cell death processes, significantly decreases proliferative processes. Glioma cells with ERN1 knockdown were used in order to investigate the effect of ERNI blockade on the expression of TP53, MDM2, PERP, and USP7 genes and its hypoxic regulation. We have studied the expression of TP53 (tumor protein 53), MDM2 (TP53 E3 ubiquitin protein ligase homolog), PERP (TP53 apoptosis effector), and USP7 (ubiquitin specific peptidase 7) genes, which are related to cell proliferation and apoptosis, in glioma cells with ERN1 knockdown under hypoxic condition. It was shown that blockade of ERNI gene function in U87 glioma cells intensified the expression of TP53 and USP7 genes, but decreased the expression ofMDM2 and PERP genes. Thus, an enhanced expression of TP53 gene in ERN1 knockdown glioma cells correlates with the decreased level of ubiquitin ligase MDM2 and increased expression level of USP7 which deubiquitinates TP53 and MDM2 and induces TP53-dependent cell growth repression and apoptosis. At the same time, the expression levels of TP53, MDM2, and USP7 genes do not change significantly in glioma cells with suppression of endoribonuclease activity only, but PERP gene expression is strongly increased. Moreover, the expression of TP53 and UPS7 genes is decreased in hypoxic conditions in control glioma cells only; however, MDM2 and PERP gene expressions are increased in both cell types, being more significant in ERN1 knockdown cells. Thus, the expression of genes encoding TP53 and related to TP53 factors depends upon the endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling as well as on hypoxia, and correlates with suppression of glioma growth under ERN1 knockdown.
---
PMID: 30078679 | 2018 | Biochemical and biophysical research communications
  Title: Myocardin-related transcription factor A (MRTF-A) mediates doxorubicin-induced PERP transcription in colon cancer cells.
  Authors: Chen B, Li Z, Feng Y ... Xu Y
  Abstract: Doxorubicin (DOX) is a cytotoxic compound capable of instigating apoptosis in cancer cells. TP53 apoptosis effector (PERP) is a key mediator of apoptosis in multiple cell types. PERP transcription is activated by a range of pro-apoptotic stimuli. In the present study, we investigated the regulation of DOX-induced PERP transcription in colon cancer cells (SW480) by the transcriptional modulator myocardin-related transcription factor A (MRTF-A). We report that DOX treatment up-regulated MRTF-A expression paralleling PERP activation. DOX also promoted nuclear translocation of MRTF-A. On the contrary, MRTF-A depletion or inhibition attenuated DOX-induced apoptosis as evidenced by the MTT assay and caspase 3 cleavage. In accordance, MRTF-A depletion or inhibition dampened PERP transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that DOX treatment promoted the binding of MRTF-A on the PERP promoter. Mechanistically, MRTF-A was recruited to the PERP promoter by activator protein 1 (AP-1). AP-1 interacted and cooperated with MRTF-A to activate PERP transcription. AP-1 silencing weakened PERP trans-activation by DOX presumably by compromising MRTF-A recruitment to the PERP promoter. In conclusion, our data suggest that MRTF-A might be a key regulator of DOX-induced PERP transcription in colon cancer cells.
---
PMID: 19040420 | 2009 | Journal of cellular and molecular medicine
  Title: P53 apoptosis mediator PERP: localization, function and caspase activation in uveal melanoma.
  Authors: Davies L, Gray D, Spiller D ... Paraoan L
  Abstract: p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22 (PERP) is a transcriptional target gene of p53 tumour suppressor that is specifically induced during apoptosis and not during cell cycle arrest. In primary uveal melanoma (UM), the most common intraocular malignancy in adults that has a reportedly unaffected signalling pathway upstream of and including p53, PERP expression is down-regulated in the metastatic monosomy 3-type tumours, compared with the less aggressive disomy 3-type tumours. Here, we demonstrate experimentally, by the use of full-length PERP-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions and real-time confocal microscopy, the intracellular targeting and plasma membrane localization of PERP in living UM cells and show that expression of PERP induces caspase-mediated apoptosis in UM cells. Induction of PERP expression in GFP-PERP-transfected UM cells leads to increased levels of cleaved caspase-8 forms, as well as to reduction of its full-length substrate Bid, but not to detectable processing of caspase-9. The levels of mature caspase-8, -9 and -3 proteins significantly correlate with PERP expression levels in primary UMs. Transcriptional profiling of PERP and caspase-8 in tumour specimens indicates that the positive association of PERP and caspase-8 proteins is a consequence of post-translational processing, most likely at the level of caspase-8 cleavage, and not of increased transcription of pro-caspase-8. We conclude that PERP expression leads to activation of an extrinsic receptor-mediated apoptotic pathway, with a possible subsequent engagement of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. The findings underline the apoptotic pathway mediated by PERP as a critical mechanism employed by UM tumours to modulate susceptibility to apoptosis.
---
PMID: 27584665 | 2016 | British journal of cancer
  Title: p63 is required beside p53 for PERP-mediated apoptosis in uveal melanoma.
  Authors: Awais R, Spiller DG, White MR ... Paraoan L
  Abstract: [BACKGROUND] PERP (p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22), a transcriptional target of p53, is downregulated and contributes to the impairment of apoptosis in uveal melanoma (UM). Intriguingly, PERP is not induced in UM despite functional p53. p63, located on chromosome 3, which is characteristically altered in high-risk UM, can transactivate PERP. Here, we determine the functional role of p63 expression in the initiation of p53/PERP-mediated apoptosis in UM. [METHODS] PERP expression was monitored by quantitative PCR (qPCR) and immunoblotting in UM cell lines treated with DNA-damaging agents. The functional role of p63 was assessed by transient expression of p63-turbo GFP (p63-tGFP) in the apoptosis- resistant, 3q-deficient OCM-1 cells. Expression and localisation of p63, PERP and p53, and induction of apoptosis were characterised by qPCR, immunoblotting and live cell confocal microscopy. [RESULTS] PERP expression was significantly downregulated in all UM cell lines. DNA-damaging treatments failed to induce apoptosis and activate PERP in OCM-1 cells, which displayed non-functional levels of p63. Expression of p63-tGFP induced apoptosis with marked increase in PERP expression and associated p53 accumulation. [CONCLUSIONS] Lack of p63 contributes to reduced PERP levels and impaired p53-mediated apoptosis in UM. p63 expression is required for PERP-mediated apoptosis in UM.
---
PMID: 38525370 | 2024 | Cancer management and research
  Title: PERP May Affect the Prognosis of Lung Adenocarcinoma by Inhibiting Apoptosis.
  Authors: Liu Z, Han S, Luo Y ... Tang H
  Abstract: [BACKGROUND] PERP, a member of the peripheral myelin protein gene family, is a new therapeutic target in cancer. The relationships between PERP and immune cell infiltration in lung cancer have not been studied. Therefore, the role of PERP in the tumour microenvironment (TME) of lung cancer needs to be further explored. [METHODS] In this study, we explored the association between PERP expression and clinical characteristics by analysing data from the TCGA database. Cox regression and Kaplan‒Meier methods were used to investigate the relationship between the expression of PERP and overall survival in patients with lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). The relationship between PERP expression and the degree of infiltration of specific immune cell subsets in LUAD was evaluated using the TIMER database and GEPIA. We also performed GO enrichment analysis and KEGG enrichment analysis to reveal genes coexpressed with PERP using the Coexpedia database. Finally, we verified the expression and function of PERP in LUAD tissues and the A549 cell line by RT‒PCR, Western blot, CCK-8, IHC, and wound healing assays. The mouse model was used to study the in vivo effects of PERP. [RESULTS] According to our results, PERP expression was significantly higher in LUAD tissues and associated with the clinical characteristics of the disease. Survival was independently associated with PERP in LUAD patients. We further verified that PERP might regulate B-cell infiltration in LUAD to affect the prognosis of LUAD. To identify PERP-related signalling pathways in LUAD, we performed a genome-aggregation analysis (GSEA) between low and high PERP expression datasets. LUAD cells express higher levels of PERP than paracarcinoma cells, and PERP inhibits the proliferation and metastasis of A549 cells through apoptosis. [CONCLUSION] PERP may affect the prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma by inhibiting apoptosis and is associated with immune cell infiltration.
---
PMID: 22515648 | 2012 | Breast cancer research : BCR
  Title: Deficiency of the p53/p63 target Perp alters mammary gland homeostasis and promotes cancer.
  Authors: Dusek RL, Bascom JL, Vogel H ... Attardi LD
  Abstract: [INTRODUCTION] Perp is a transcriptional target of both p53 during DNA damage-induced apoptosis and p63 during stratified epithelial development. Perp-/- mice exhibit postnatal lethality associated with dramatic blistering of the epidermis and oral mucosa, reflecting a critical role in desmosome-mediated intercellular adhesion in keratinocytes. However, the role of Perp in tissue homeostasis in other p63-dependent stratified epithelial tissues is poorly understood. Given that p63 is essential for proper mammary gland development and that cell adhesion is fundamental for ensuring the proper architecture and function of the mammary epithelium, here we investigate Perp function in the mammary gland. [METHODS] Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis were performed to characterize Perp expression and localization in the mouse mammary epithelium throughout development. The consequences of Perp deficiency for mammary epithelial development and homeostasis were examined by using in vivo mammary transplant assays. Perp protein levels in a variety of human breast cancer cell lines were compared with those in untransformed cells with Western blot analysis. The role of Perp in mouse mammary tumorigenesis was investigated by aging cohorts of K14-Cre/+;p53fl/fl mice that were wild-type or deficient for Perp. Mammary tumor latency was analyzed, and tumor-free survival was assessed using Kaplan-Meier analysis. [RESULTS] We show that Perp protein is expressed in the mammary epithelium, where it colocalizes with desmosomes. Interestingly, although altering desmosomes through genetic inactivation of Perp does not dramatically impair mammary gland ductal development, Perp loss affects mammary epithelial homeostasis by causing the accumulation of inflammatory cells around mature mammary epithelium. Moreover, we show reduced Perp expression in many human breast cancer cell lines compared with untransformed cells. Importantly, Perp deficiency also promotes the development of mouse mammary cancer. [CONCLUSIONS] Together, these observations demonstrate an important role for Perp in normal mammary tissue function and in mammary cancer suppression. In addition, our findings highlight the importance of desmosomes in cancer suppression and suggest the merit of evaluating Perp as a potential prognostic indicator or molecular target in breast cancer therapy.
---
PMID: 14707288 | 2003 | Molecular cancer research : MCR
  Title: Multiple response elements and differential p53 binding control Perp expression during apoptosis.
  Authors: Reczek EE, Flores ER, Tsay AS ... Jacks T
  Abstract: The p53 tumor suppressor gene responds to cellular stress by activating either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. A growing number of target genes involved in each of these pathways have been identified. However, the mechanism by which the apoptosis versus arrest decision is made remains to be elucidated. Perp is a proapoptotic target gene of p53 expressed to high levels in apoptotic cells compared with those undergoing cell cycle arrest. This pattern of expression is unusual among p53 target genes, many of which are induced to similar levels during arrest and apoptosis. Here, we describe the regulation of the Perp gene by p53 through at least three response elements in the Perp promoter and first intron. These sites are occupied in vivo in E1A-expressing mouse embryo fibroblasts undergoing apoptosis but not cell cycle arrest, in contrast to the p21 5' response element, which is occupied during both. The apoptosis-deficient p53 point mutant, p53V143A, displays a selective deficit in binding to the Perp elements, demonstrating that p53 can distinguish between Perp and p21 at the level of DNA binding. These results provide mechanistic insight into the selective expression of Perp during apoptosis and may provide a useful model for studying the p53-dependent cell cycle arrest versus apoptosis decision.
---
PMID: 19353588 | 2009 | American journal of medical genetics. Part A
  Title: Differential PERP regulation by TP63 mutants provides insight into AEC pathogenesis.
  Authors: Beaudry VG, Pathak N, Koster MI ... Attardi LD
  Abstract: Ankyloblepharon Ectodermal Dysplasia and Cleft Lip/Palate (AEC) or Hay-Wells Syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a variety of phenotypes in ectodermal derivatives, including severe skin erosions, ankyloblepharon, coarse and wiry hair, scalp dermatitis, and dystrophic nails. AEC is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the TP63 transcription factor, specifically in the Sterile Alpha Motif (SAM) domain. The exact mechanism, however, by which these specific TP63 mutations lead to the observed spectrum of phenotypes is unclear. Analysis of individual TP63 target genes provides a means to understand specific aspects of the phenotypes associated with AEC. PERP is a TP63 target critical for cell-cell adhesion due to its participation in desmosomal adhesion complexes. As PERP null mice display symptoms characteristic of ectodermal dysplasia syndromes, we hypothesized that PERP dysfunction might contribute to AEC. Using luciferase reporter assays, we demonstrate here that PERP induction is in fact compromised with some, but not all, AEC-patient derived TP63 mutants. Through analysis of skin biopsies from AEC patients, we show further that a subset of these display aberrant PERP expression, suggesting the possibility that PERP dysregulation is involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. These findings demonstrate that distinct AEC TP63 mutants can differentially compromise expression of downstream targets, providing a rationale for the variable spectra of symptoms seen in AEC patients. Elucidating how specific TP63 target genes contribute to the pathogenesis of AEC will ultimately help design novel approaches to diagnose and treat AEC.
---
PMID: 10733530 | 2000 | Genes & development
  Title: PERP, an apoptosis-associated target of p53, is a novel member of the PMP-22/gas3 family.
  Authors: Attardi LD, Reczek EE, Cosmas C ... Jacks T
  Abstract: The p53 tumor suppressor activates either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in response to cellular stress. Mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) provide a powerful primary cell system to study both p53-dependent pathways. Specifically, in response to DNA damage, MEFs undergo p53-dependent G(1) arrest, whereas MEFs expressing the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein undergo p53-dependent apoptosis. As the p53-dependent apoptosis pathway is not well understood, we sought to identify apoptosis-specific p53 target genes using a subtractive cloning strategy. Here, we describe the characterization of a gene identified in this screen, PERP, which is expressed in a p53-dependent manner and at high levels in apoptotic cells compared with G(1)-arrested cells. PERP induction is linked to p53-dependent apoptosis, including in response to E2F-1-driven hyperproliferation. Furthermore, analysis of the PERP promoter suggests that PERP is directly activated by p53. PERP shows sequence similarity to the PMP-22/gas3 tetraspan membrane protein implicated in hereditary human neuropathies such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth. Like PMP-22/gas3, PERP is a plasma membrane protein, and importantly, its expression causes cell death in fibroblasts. Taken together, these data suggest that PERP is a novel effector of p53-dependent apoptosis.
---
PMID: 11062687 | 2000 | Anticancer research
  Title: Identification of THW, a putative new tumor suppressor gene.
  Authors: Hildebrandt T, Preiherr J, Tarbé N ... Weidle UH
  Abstract: Differential Display between metastasizing and non-metastasizing human melanoma cell lines NMCL-1 and 530 led to the identification of a putative transmembrane receptor, designated as THW, which is down-regulated in the metastasizing cell line. THW is composed of 193 aa, exhibits four putative transmembrane domains and does not reveal any homology to other proteins. Down-regulation of THW is correlated with metastatic capacity of melanoma cell lines. THW was down-regulated in mammary carcinoma cell lines compared with cell lines derived from non-malignant mammary epithelium, in pancreas cell lines derived from metastases compared with a cell line derived from a primary tumor and in several tumor tissues compared with normal tissues. The function of THW as a tumor suppressor is emphasized by the location of the THW gene on chromosome 6q. LOH for this region has been reported in malignant melanoma and prostate, pancreas, uterine and mammary carcinomas.
---
PMID: 12752121 | 2003 | The British journal of dermatology
  Title: Identification of novel genes for secreted and membrane-anchored proteins in human keratinocytes.
  Authors: Bonkobara M, Das A, Takao J ... Ariizumi K
  Abstract: [BACKGROUND] Both intercellular and intracellular signals are transduced primarily by interactions of secreted and/or membrane-anchored polypeptides, and they play a pivotal role in regulating proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of keratinocytes within the epidermis. Despite recent identification of these polypeptides, it is likely that several important molecules remain undisclosed. [OBJECTIVES] To identify novel genes encoding secreted or membrane-anchored polypeptides expressed by human keratinocytes. [METHODS] We employed a signal sequence (SS) trap of a 5'-end-enriched cDNA library prepared from primary cultured human keratinocytes. Gene expression analysis was performed using Northern blotting. R Screening of 4018 cDNA clones yielded 82 positive clones (57 independent genes), most of which encoded SSs in their N-termini. Most of the positive clones were known genes registered in the GenBank database. Seven genes were identified in the EST database, four of which encoded novel membrane-anchored polypeptides with features of type I transmembrane proteins; the other three genes encoded novel non-type I transmembrane polypeptides. These EST genes were expressed differentially by keratinocytes subjected to low vs. high calcium concentrations and by basal vs. squamous cell carcinomas. [CONCLUSIONS] Using the SS trap, we isolated many genes known to be involved in constituting epidermal structures and others that had not previously been associated with keratinocytes. In addition, we identified novel genes (EST genes) that differ in kinetics of gene expression in keratinocyte differentiation. Our results validate the effective use of this SS trap method for identifying secreted and membrane-anchored polypeptides expressed by human keratinocytes. The identification will better illuminate the molecular mechanisms responsible for co-ordinated regulation of epidermal homeostasis.
---
PMID: 14614825 | 2003 | Current biology : CB
  Title: Perp is a mediator of p53-dependent apoptosis in diverse cell types.
  Authors: Ihrie RA, Reczek E, Horner JS ... Attardi LD
  Abstract: The induction of apoptosis by the p53 protein is critical for its activity as a tumor suppressor. Although it is clear that p53 induces apoptosis at least in part by direct transcriptional activation of target genes, the set of p53 target genes that mediate p53 function in apoptosis in vivo remains to be well defined. The Perp (p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22) gene is highly expressed in cells undergoing p53-dependent apoptosis as compared to cells undergoing p53-dependent G1 arrest. Perp is a direct p53 target, and its overexpression is sufficient to induce cell death in fibroblasts, implicating it as an important component of p53 apoptotic function. Here, through the generation of Perp-deficient mice, we analyze the role of Perp in the p53 apoptosis pathway in multiple primary cell types by comparing the cell death responses of Perp null cells to those of wild-type and p53 null cells. These experiments demonstrate the involvement of Perp in p53-mediated cell death in thymocytes and neurons but not in E1A-expressing MEFs, indicating a cell type-specific role for Perp in the p53 cell death pathway. In addition, we show that Perp is not required for proliferation-associated functions of p53. Thus, Perp selectively mediates the p53 apoptotic response, and the requirement for Perp is dictated by cellular context.
---
PMID: 35178836 | 2022 | Cancer science
  Title: DCAF13 promotes breast cancer cell proliferation by ubiquitin inhibiting PERP expression.
  Authors: Shan BQ, Wang XM, Zheng L ... Zhang X
  Abstract: Evolutionarily conserved DDB1-and CUL4-associated factor 13 (DCAF13) is a recently discovered substrate receptor for the cullin RING-finger ubiquitin ligase 4 (CRL4) E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates cell cycle progression. DCAF13 is overexpressed in many cancers, although its role in breast cancer is currently elusive. In this study we demonstrate that DCAF13 is overexpressed in human breast cancer and that its overexpression closely correlates with poor prognosis, suggesting that DCAF13 may serve as a diagnostic marker and therapeutic target. We knocked down DCAF13 in breast cancer cell lines using CRISPR/Cas9 and found that DCAF13 deletion markedly reduced breast cancer cell proliferation, clone formation, and migration both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, DCAF13 deletion promoted breast cancer cell apoptosis and senescence, and induced cell cycle arrest in the G1/S phase. Genome-wide RNAseq analysis and western blotting revealed that loss of DCAF13 resulted in both mRNA and protein accumulation of p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP22 (PERP). Knockdown of PERP partially reversed the hampered cell proliferation induced by DCAF13 knockdown. Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that DCAF13 and DNA damage-binding protein 1 (DDB1) directly interact with PERP. Overexpression of DDB1 significantly increased PERP polyubiquitination, suggesting that CRL4
---
PMID: 31898316 | 2020 | Clinical genetics
  Title: Confirming the recessive inheritance of PERP-related erythrokeratoderma.
  Authors: Patel N, Alkeraye S, Alobeid E ... Alkuraya FS
  Abstract: Erythrokeratoderma (EK) is heterogeneous clinical entity characterized by excessive scaling with resulting erythrokeratotic plaques. Several genes have been linked to EK and they encode a number of proteins that are important for the integrity of the keratinocyte layer of the epidermis. PERP is a transcription factor that is activated by both p53 and p63. However, its deficiency in a mouse model appears to only recapitulate p63-mediated role in skin development and organization. We report an extended multiplex consanguineous family in which an EK phenotype with a striking similarity to that observed in Perp
---
PMID: 30131392 | 2018 | Diabetes
  Title: Glucolipotoxicity-Inhibited 
  Authors: Huang Q, You W, Li Y ... Han X
  Abstract: Inhibition of microRNAs (miRNAs) essential for pancreatic β-cell biology (e.g., 
---
PMID: 24066004 | 2013 | Clinical & developmental immunology
  Title: Decreased PERP expression on peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patient with rheumatoid arthritis negatively correlates with disease activity.
  Authors: Du Y, Deng L, Li Y ... Shi G
  Abstract: [BACKGROUND] PERP, p53 apoptosis effector related to PMP-22, is a p53-dependent apoptosis in diverse cell types and has cell type-specific roles in p53-mediated apoptosis. However, its role in PBMCs of RA patients has remained largely unclear. [OBJECTIVES] The aim of this study was to detect the expression levels of PERP on PBMCs of RA patients and healthy controls and analyze the role of PERP in the pathogenesis of RA. Methods. The mRNA expression levels of PERP and IL-17 were detected by real-time PCR in PBMCs from patients with RA (n = 40) and healthy controls (n = 40). The correlations of PERP expression levels to IL-17 transcripts and disease activity parameters were analyzed. [RESULTS] The PERP and IL-17 expression levels in the PBMCs were significantly decreased and increased in comparison of which in healthy controls. The mRNA expression levels of PERP in PBMCs from patients with RA were negatively correlated with IL-17 and disease activity parameters DAS28, RF, CRP, and ESR rather than Anti-CCP and ANA. [CONCLUSIONS] These results demonstrated that PERP might be involved in the pathogenesis and a potential therapeutic target of RA by regulating the expression of IL-17.
---
PMID: 23217540 | 2013 | Oral surgery, oral medicine, oral pathology and oral radiology
  Title: Loss of the p53/p63 target PERP is an early event in oral carcinogenesis and correlates with higher rate of local relapse.
  Authors: Kong CS, Cao H, Kwok S ... Le QT
  Abstract: [BACKGROUND] PERP is a p53/p63-regulated gene encoding a desmosomal protein that plays a critical role in cell-cell adhesion and tumor suppression. [STUDY DESIGN] We evaluated PERP expression in different grades of oral dysplasia (34 cases) and at different stages of invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and correlated the latter with clinical outcome. A tissue microarray consisting of nondysplastic mucosa, carcinoma in situ, SCC, and nodal metastases from 33 patients with human papilloma virus-negative SCC was stained for PERP and E-cadherin. [RESULTS] Complete loss of PERP expression was associated with worse local control in patients with SCC. The 5-year local control rate was 91% for patients with partial PERP loss versus 31% for those with complete loss (P = .01). [CONCLUSIONS] This is the first study to show that loss of PERP expression correlates with the transition to SCC and with increased local relapse in patients with oral cavity SCC.
---
